Hi, I'm Lisa Garr, host
of Gaiam Inspirations.
Research shows that
80% of adults in the US
have back and neck
pain at some time.
So if it's you or if it's
someone that you know that just
deals with the nagging
pain of a sore back
or even more severe
symptoms, today's show
is like having a brain
body transformational
session in your own home.
I want you to do some
exercises along with us today.
Anat Baniel is joining
me, she's the creator
of the Anat Baniel Method.
After years of working
with tens of thousands
of people, along with
her understanding
of how the brain
changes itself, Anat
teaches us ways to access
the brain to overcome
pain and limitations.
Thank you so much
for being here.
I'm so happy to
be with you, Lisa.
Oh my goodness,
what you've done
and what you have to give
the world is so incredible.
I want you to stand on that
hill with a giant beacon
and just tell everybody.
So first of all, let's get
to the root of the problem.
Why do you think so many
people have back and neck
pain in the first place?
It's due to two main
factors, I think.
One is overuse and the
other one is misuse,
and I think the second
one is primarily.
That means we learn
how to move when we're
born-- all human beings can
do any voluntary movement--
and then through a long
process over many years,
we learn how to stand, sit,
walk, control our heads,
and so on.
And in that process there's
lots and lots of opportunity
to actually learn things
that are not optimal,
so we get habits
that are not optimal
and then we stop that
development once very often
because we don't attend to it,
people don't understand it,
and kids already-- by
the age of 6, 7, 8, 9--
can have pretty poor posture
habits and movement habits
that then they carry into life.
And the body's built
to work better,
so it sort of
fatigues the joints,
fatigues the [INAUDIBLE], and
creates inflammation and so on.
And the other one, which I hope
we get a chance to talk about,
is the fact that we're built to
keep evolving throughout life,
including the way we
move, the sophistication
of the way we use our body.
So then rather than what
normally people feel and think,
oh, you're young and
then you move really well
and then you're 30 and it's
not as good and then you're 40
and it's even worse and then
you're 50 and it's really sad.
The quality of movement,
there is opportunity
to improve it throughout
life if we know how
to access the brain to do that.
OK, so that's
the main key here,
is how to access the
brain to change the body.
But let me go back
to your first point
about what if we get
in accidents or kids
fall off their bike or
they dive to catch a ball.
Do they ever fully
recover from that
or is that where
those little injuries
and posture changes begin?
We've all done this.
-Absolutely.
Absolutely, and ideally-- it's
so easy to take care of it.
When there'll be, I think,
a wider understanding
of how these things
work, then it
can be corrected immediately.
But when, let's
say, a kid dives--
and it's not a concussion
or anything serious--
LISA: Right.
--but it hurts,
there's a bruise, they
can't really use that part.
The brain is so plastic,
that means it changes
so quickly that it
re-patterns the movement
to accommodate for-- let's say--
the right shoulder not to move.
And what happens is it
becomes a habit in no time,
so then unconscious
to the child,
unconscious to the environment
around the child, everything
he's learned with that
not moving quite as well.
And so we sort of circumvent
it, then we grow with a limited
shoulder that then shows
up, could show up as pain
in the shoulder,
neck, lower back,
and be a problem in the
feet, because it's a shift
in the posture and weight
bearing, and it's-- yes.
I mean, how many
of us did that?
We had banged up knees--
-Everybody.
-Yes.
Yes.
OK, so you said that
the brain is plastic.
Now I know plastic
as being hard,
what do you mean by plastic?
Changeable.
It can change.
LISA: OK.
So plasticity
means changeability,
and our organs
regenerate themselves
and change all the time, like
the skin and things like that.
But the system or the
organ in the body that
is most subject to change, and
is built to change in response
to experience, is the brain.
So the brain can
change the most.
And it does all the time.
The question is, is it going
to change in positive direction
or in a negative direction?
It's either or usually.
OK, so you're
here to help direct
it into the positive flow.
Tell me, how did you
get started in this
and where did you
learn all this?
And tell me a little bit
about your background.
OK, so I'm Israeli
born, and when
I was as young as three years
old, my father was a scientist
and was introduced to Dr. Moshe
Feldenkrais, who-- those who
know his work in
the 20th century,
he was like the
pioneer of the brain
movement, brain plasticity.
It didn't have the name then,
but he knew that the brain is
a-- well, it's a
fancy set of words,
but a dynamic highly complex
system that will change.
And people didn't understand
what he was talking about,
but my father met him and
experienced one of his movement
lessons and organized
free movement lessons
in my parent's living
room with a group
of his actual researchers.
And I remember
just roaming around
when he used to come
once a week on Thursdays
and teach the lesson.
Then when I was about
seven, eight years old,
my father put me together
to get my dance lessons
with a Russian ballerina that
studied in the same group
as my father did--
Feldenkrais's movement lessons--
and she integrated, she had
us little girls do them.
Oh, wow.
So I experienced the work,
I was about seven or eight,
and I'll never forget
the very first time.
I mean, I remember
vividly until today.
Firs of all, she asked us to
sit down, lean against the wall,
and feel ourselves
and pay attention
to what we feel in our
bodies, and nobody ever
asked me to do that.
And it was like
a whole new world
just opened up wide
instantaneously.
And then we started
doing movements
and at the end of that
lesson I walked home--
I walked to the bus
station and then home--
and my body, myself, I
felt completely different,
but not just physically,
also emotionally.
Then we came to the states, we
lived in Berkeley for a while
and so on, and so
when I came back,
I didn't study with
this teacher anymore
and it all faded
into the background.
Fast forward to grad school
and I'm studying to become
a clinical psychologist.
I kept doing dance, I danced
my whole life, considered it
as a career, but I
forgot about what we
call the lessons on the floor.
And I realized I want
to work with people
more with the feeling of
the body and with movement,
not just so much through
verbal communication,
and I started seeking.
And six months into
that, I remembered
the lessons on the
floor and that's
when I reconnected
with Feldenkrais--
Oh, wow.
--and I started
taking private sessions
with him and it was remarkable,
and then his group class.
And then a year
and a half into it,
he opened a training program--
a three-year training program
in San Francisco-- so I took
my little self with a suitcase
and I did it.
Oh my goodness, how old
were you at the time?
ANAT: 22.
-22, my goodness.
ANAT: Yeah, I started young.
I was very, very lucky.
But to have that awareness of
your body at that age is huge.
I mean, just to look in and
to understand that the body is
an alive, beautiful,
working machine,
and to really get in touch
with its beautiful intricacies,
most don't even take a moment
to do that throughout our day,
and how amazing our bodies are.
Yet you at seven, eight,
had that experience,
took it on at 22,
and then of course,
everything you do now you add
it on and changed and applied
what you learned and everything,
you've evolved his work
into a beautiful thing.
I want you to take a
look at this video.
This will just melt your heart.
Take a look at Anat's work.
I want to tell you
about my son, Cyprus.
In July of 2008, after
a traumatic birth,
I met my son who would
become my personal superhero.
Cyprus didn't have a
heartbeat when he was born.
After two rounds of
resuscitation, he came to life.
On the sixth day of his life, he
had an MRI showing brain damage
in the basal
ganglia and received
the prognosis of
highly-probable cerebral palsy.
I was devastated.
I had little understanding
of what that meant
and how it might
affect our lives.
We were told to go
home, wait, and watch,
and to see if he
missed milestones.
We took him home
and just loved him.
At three months, we were
told he should be doing more
and he started traditional
physical therapy.
For the next six months,
we saw little change.
When Cyprus was nine
months old, we connected
with the Anat Baniel Method.
Neil Sharp gave him his
first lesson, in which he
rolled over for the first time.
I knew we'd found our path.
I'm going to try to get
through this without crying,
but there's no promises.
Shortly after we met with
Anat, she looked me in the eyes
and recognized my fear, and said
everything is going to be OK,
and I knew instinctively
to trust her.
We let go of traditional therapy
and watched Cyprus progress.
He started rolling to get
around, then commando crawling,
and then onto hands and
knees, and at 19 months
he was pulling to standing.
At that time, we were
told by our neurologist
that in the future we would
be looking for a wheelchair,
because there was no way
he was ever going to walk.
The next day, Neil taught
him how to crawl up stairs.
I remember saying that
going to see the neurologist
was like visiting the
office of limitations,
and I would rather come here to
the center for possibilities.
Three weeks ago,
Cyprus started walking.
[APPLAUSE]
I should also mention
he rarely stops talking.
I think there's some
footage of Cyprus that's
going to be shown, but before,
I want to share my deepest
gratitude for the way ABM
has not only impacted my son,
but transformed my life
and my family as a whole.
And on behalf of my family
and my fellow classmates,
I want to thank you
for your life's work,
and for writing "Kids
Beyond Limits," which
will further push this
very important work out
into the world.
I look forward to the
Anat Baniel Method
being the standard of
care, and I love you.
OK, so how did you get
in touch with the family?
How did you meet
that particular--
how did they reach you?
Well, it was actually
my colleague, Dr. Neil
Sharp, that was
introduced to them
and they were introduced to him.
And it was through
another parent
that brought their child to
us, and that's how it started.
Wow, what an incredible story.
Well, I want you
to-- if you could--
talk to us a little
bit about Cyprus
and how he looked when you met.
And we have a video here
that we're going-- just
tell us a little bit about.
We're going to roll this
video and talk over this here.
OK, so this is Cyprus.
Our fun little guy, Cyprus,
and 2008 was when he was born?
ANAT: Yes, he was born 2008,
and as the mother mentioned
in the video, he was
born without a heartbeat
and they had resuscitated twice.
So here you see him in
the ICU, and here you
see him a little older.
And when you watch,
she tries to feed him
and he can't even hold his
head up for any length of time.
And he reacts, his
brain can't handle
any stimulation to the mouth,
so he has this jerky movement.
Here it's a little bit
later and he already rolls.
And see, his head still--
the first time he rolled,
he couldn't quite hold it
up, but I had the mother
kiss him so that when
he lifts up the head,
something good happens.
LISA: Yes.
ANAT: And the brain picks
it up really quickly,
so you'll see the next
time he rolls, he'll
pick up the head much higher.
And now here, you see here
it's a few months later
and it's in a training class,
and she brought him for one
of the trainees to work on.
And I am teaching the trainee
to go gentler and slower.
We'll talk about that later,
why that's so powerful.
Here he's at home,
it's a home video,
and he's seeing the
lens of the camera
so it's interesting for him.
You see now-- he couldn't
move at all when I saw him
the first time, he
was like a tight ball
that couldn't do anything.
And look, he tries to touch
it but he can't quite control,
and I love this sequence because
he figures it out himself
and now his brain
figured out how
to put the thumb on the lens.
This is Neil, and he's really
trying to reach the toy
and Neil brings it a little bit
closer, and then he helps him.
He does different things to
help his brain recognize that he
could use his back-- which
he couldn't quite well,
but look how well he is here.
We're going to do
a movement lesson
that will show people how to
use their lower back better.
And how happy he is.
You see, and he's so used to it.
And children with this
condition, very often
their heels are off the
floor because the muscles
are very tight, and look how
beautifully he's organized.
I'm pointing out to it.
And here it's very
important because I'm
getting his attention.
First, he wants to
get it, you see,
and he will just being fast,
so I took the ball away
and now I'm slowing down.
And now he figured it out and
look how deliriously happy
he becomes.
And this happens really fast
but the changes are immediate.
This is my favorite
sequence in this video
because he's trying to-- Neil
is doing a brilliant thing,
which he's doing nothing.
And he lets Cyprus
figure it out--
he even gets himself
out of the picture--
and look how he's
problem solving.
This is not so simple.
Look at the size of
the child, the size
of the walker, the
narrow path when there's
this door thing at the bottom.
And you see his
hands actually get
to hold it better and better.
So as he's trying to figure out
how to get this thing out-- you
see, we don't help him--
and now he gets it out.
And this is huge, and the amount
of learning, the reasoning--
Here it's actually in a
studio where do they interview
the parents for
some TV something,
and he sees himself
on the monitor.
So he goes and he
says two Cypruses.
And he goes over, and you see
he goes from crawling-- he just
started walking independently
a few days earlier--
and he asks to jump.
So he's jumping and then look--
very slowly, very gradually,
he gauges himself and figures
out how to walk forward.
This is two weeks that
he's been walking.
And he's already 3
and 1/2 years old.
Usually kids at this
age don't start walking.
LISA: Oh my goodness,
that is amazing.
And all of this
happens because you
did a positive
reinforcement with movement
between the brain and the
body, and connected them.
It's more than
positive reinforcement,
because there wasn't much
positive to reinforce.
But when something positive
happens, we amplify it.
It's providing enormous amount
of new information to the brain
starting where the child is.
So we don't ask people
to do what they can't do,
because my motto's become
if he could, he would.
If she could, she would.
People can only do
what they do right now.
But if we start
where they are now
and we start just
playing with it--
LISA: Yes.
--and moving it
around, it grows.
And then from that
something else grows,
and from that
and that's how the brain,
body, mind, self develops.
And this works, of course,
with adults as well.
Oh, very well.
Even if somebody has had a
condition for 20, 30, 50 years,
you can start to
restore mobility?
I'm so happy you're
asking this question.
Yes.
Absolutely yes, at
any age, and there's
gorgeous research on rats
that shows that before they're
getting close to dying,
they start getting
some-- basically brain
training, but it's
not like movement training.
It's getting the
brain to wake up
and start doing its job better.
And within four weeks, they
get their physical strength,
their cognitive ability
to problem solve mazes
and all that kind of stuff,
and their life span--
on the average-- increases 40%.
Oh my goodness.
It's remarkable.
Yeah.
And is it because they just
have a higher quality of life
and they want to live longer?
I don't know, I can't tell
you about rat experience,
but I can tell you that vitality
is intimately associated
with the vibrancy of the
brain and its ability
to problem solve and move in the
direction of more connections
and more complexity, rather than
loss of connection and rigidity
and that generation.
Yeah, I was instantly
applying that to adults.
I didn't so much
think about the rats.
OK, let's talk about how
we as adults can actually
get into this free
movement, something that
unlocks our body a little bit.
And I'd mentioned that we're
going to do some exercises, so
try this along at home.
All right.
OK, so if you can put
your things on the side
so you can move.
And if you take your shoes off,
and I suggest for the people
in the audience that
are watching this--
And why is the reason
for the shoes off?
Well first of all, it gives
you contact with the ground.
OK.
And we evolved or
were formed to have
contact with the
ground, and high heels
is a later invention.
that requires a brain
that can handle it,
but it's not the ideal.
And when we want to do change,
I want also the contact
from your feet to connect
to the changes that happen
in your hips and your lower
back and in your head,
so it becomes one picture.
LISA: OK.
OK?
If you can move the shoes a
little bit more so you can
spread your feet a little bit--
-Sure.
--and your knees,
and you bring
your tush to the front of the
chair so you're free to move.
And what we're going to work
on that is very important
and a very central
movement to everybody
every day is turning your head.
It's a very simple movement,
and one of the things
that we see when people get
injured and/or when they age,
the neck gets stiff, right?
And it gets harder and harder to
turn the head, harder to drive,
and when people get old, it's
actually dangerous for them
very often to cross the street
because they can't gauge
what's happening around them.
So very, very important.
So we're going to do
some ground rules,
for you and for everybody.
We're going to move
very, very slowly, we're
going to move small
movements, and we're
going to move very gently.
Now there's an intentionality
behind the slow movement,
right?
And the gentle, and we'll
talk about that afterwards.
But maybe you and
people can experience
the impact of that first?
OK.
And I'm going to
guide you, but I'm
going to ask you to just-- the
main thing is not to perform
a movement, a big
movement-- you're going
to follow my
instructions, but it's
to feel yourself as you move.
It's about connecting to what
you feel as you move, OK?
That's very, very powerful and
important for brain change.
Like you did when
you were seven
or eight-year-old little girl.
Exactly.
So I'm going to
ask you to lean on
your left hand behind--
no before you lean,
before you lean even, sorry.
Just turn your head gently to
look to one side and the other,
and just see without straining
the neck, turn the other way
and see how far you turn
if you don't try hard, OK?
And now do it one more time,
so you can see what you see
and then the other way.
And that is-- in my
world-- called fast.
So we're going to
do it one more time
and you're going to
move your head slowly.
So I'm going to show you.
It's kind of like I have time.
I'm turning my head,
but it gives me
a chance to feel if
the movement is soft
or if the movement is
like that or whatever.
LISA: OK.
So you're going to go slow.
You're not used to that but
you're going to go slow.
That's excellent.
And now you can feel
where it jumps, you see?
It's not completely smooth.
But it doesn't matter,
it can get smooth.
Is that normal?
Yes, very common.
Very, very common.
It jumps, what do you mean?
It's not organized
to move smoothly
and the areas that it jumps, it
means there's some discomfort
and stuff like that.
But that's the
opportunity to get better.
You see, I like those
things because it opens
up the door for improvement.
LISA: Uh-huh.
OK?
Now lean on your
left hand behind you.
So I'm going to do my right--
-OK
On your left hand behind you
like that, that's excellent.
You took some weight
off from your back.
I did.
And you're going
to take this hand
and you're going to put your
chin on the back of your hand,
and then you're actually going
to lean on it a little bit.
So you're going to
be a little slouchy.
LISA: OK.
-OK, excellent.
LISA: It feels good.
Good.
And now you're going to
move your head and your arm
and your shoulder, everything
together, to look to your left.
I'm going to your left, right?
And then back.
That's right.
You're doing
excellent, just drop it
so it hangs a little more.
Yeah, but you lean on it.
And do it again and as you do
it slowly-- begin doing it.
-To the left?
-Yeah, but see what moves else.
Do you feel the ribs
moving a little bit,
the spine moving a little bit?
And come back.
And I'm going to actually
touch you in a minute somewhere
where there isn't
much movement yet.
OK.
ANAT: OK?
So go very slow so I can do it.
And notice that you do the
movement but you're pelvis
is pretty much inert.
Right, it's not moving at all.
Exactly, and most people are
like that in the beginning.
So now we are going to do
something a little different.
So first of all,
rest for one second
and bring both hands in
front, and just sit and see
whether those three movements--
don't even look at me,
just go internal for a moment--
and feel if those three
movements-- as
little as they are
and as imperfect as
you did them-- still
you sit a little
differently, maybe
a little lighter or whatnot.
And if you feel a
difference between one
shoulder and the other.
My right shoulder
feels higher, actually.
ANAT: Yes, OK, whatever.
But just feel the difference.
-It's different.
ANAT: Yeah.
And now, lean on the left
hand behind you again.
Lean on the back
of the hand again.
And now you're going to turn
yourself like this to the left
as far as is comfortable and
you're going to stay there.
As far as comfortable but don't
move the head without the arm,
and stay there.
And now in this position, only
your eyes, move them right
and left very gently so you
don't give yourself a headache.
Right and left.
Very gentle.
Very, very gentle.
And now keep the arm and
hand and shoulder where they
are, but just to
head, turn it so it
would leave the hand, right?
Turn it to the left
a little bit more.
That's right, and then
turn it to the right.
And the eyes stay--
They go wherever
they want right now.
Wherever you want.
That's right, you took a breath.
And now, take the head and the
eyes in opposite directions.
So you have to think,
slowly, that's right.
You're doing excellent.
And then take the
head and the eyes
in the opposite directions.
That's it.
This is great for eye
movement exercises, because we
stare computers all day--
And now come back to the
middle, lean on the hand,
back of the hand
like you did before.
And now go ahead and turn
to your left, everything
together again.
-With [INAUDIBLE]?
-Yeah.
And feel if it got
a little easier.
Yes.
And you see this part has
started moving now, yeah.
Now your ribs have
started moving--
Just by doing
the eye exercises?
Yes, because it's
mitigated through the brain.
And now rest, just
rest, put both hands
and sit and just feel now.
You see, you're
sitting taller, easier.
Do you feel?
LISA: Yes.
You popped upright more.
LISA: Warmer, yes.
Yes.
You see, you don't have
to-- you just popped up.
LISA: I have actually more
energy, more alertness.
Exactly, that's what happens.
We're going to do either
one or two more variations.
So now we're going to do
something, the next step.
So lean on the hand behind you,
and see now you lean better,
you feel your spine knows where
to go to transfer the weight.
You see, the
intelligence wakes up.
Lean on the back of the hand,
twist easily as far as you go,
and now what you're going
to do is you're going to put
this hand also on your chair.
-OK.
ANAT: So you're leaning now
on both hands, that's right.
And now what I'm
going to ask you to do
is to pick up the right side
of your tush and put it down.
So my right hip and then down.
The right hip and down.
And feel very slowly how
that makes you taller.
You see, it pushes the
top of the head taller.
And now every time you do
this, also turn the shoulders
and head to the left.
So we'll do it again
at the same time.
So you're going to
have to go much slower.
To the left, OK.
Yeah, you're going
to go much slower
so you can coordinate it.
So both shoulders turn
and the head, and the hip
comes, and then you come
back to where you were.
It feels great. on the spine.
Yeah, of course,
because it integrates it
into the movement.
Before about 50% of the
spine wasn't participating.
There you go.
Now we're going to do
something a little funny,
so you'll have to slow down,
stay there, lean on your hands.
You're going to
lift the hip again
but you're going to
turn your shoulders
and head to the right.
-OK.
-So it'll feel contradictory.
-This way, OK.
Yes, that's it.
And feel if you can soften
the chestbone, the ribs,
that it will allow you to go.
See, most people are not
aware of their sternum at all.
Not at all.
It's like it's dead
to them, there you go.
Yeah.
You feel how the
hip got softer?
Yes.
And now twist again to the
left, everything to the left.
To the left and look
where you're going.
Oh wow, I can see all
the way behind me now.
Exactly, and rest for a second.
You see now how your pelvis
moves, it comes to life.
LISA: It's interesting, we're
not aware of our sternum bone
at all.
-All all.
That's what houses our heart.
Yes, and it stiffens the
whole chest, which immobilizes
the chest, which lowers
your energy and makes
people feel a little
depressed and all that stuff.
Now lean on your
left hand behind you.
OK.
Put the arm under your chin,
twist yourself and use your hip
and turn around with the hip,
with everything, there you go.
LISA: Oh, my hip just popped.
But pressing on the foot, now
you know why you're barefoot.
LISA: Yep.
-You see?
So it's from the bottom
throughout your whole self.
Oh, are you doing this at home?
This is great.
And now, one more
thing we're going to do
is as you do it,
push you belly out
instead of pulling the belly
in, which many people do.
Push the belly out, out, out.
There you go.
You see how tall you got?
It allows the spine to get tall.
-Yeah.
Try it again.
Push the belly out.
There you go.
How about that, girl?
And rest.
We don't do that at all.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
Try it one time.
Lean on your left hand,
put your chin on this,
pull your belly in
and hold it tight.
No, pull your bell
in and hold it tight
and keep it like that--
-OK.
--and try to turn.
Keep it like that, then try
to turn and see what happens.
Terrible.
-Yeah.
You feel?
And now do the other way.
Push the belly out,
twist around and do it.
There you go.
Yeah.
Which person would
you rather be?
And now rest and just feel--
I can see it in your face,
the right side of your
face looks completely
different than the left.
The tone is--
Really?
Yeah.
You are trained to see
these things, that's amazing.
Yeah, but you close
your eyes and feel it.
Feel yourself throughout
your whole right
side, including the
bottom of your foot
and your whole left side.
Can you feel any different?
That's it, and now your
diaphragm just let go.
Yeah.
Wow, you're trained so
well to look exactly
at the nuances of the body.
It's beautiful.
Things that I'm doing
that I don't even notice.
ANAT: Exactly, and
that's a big part
of the work is that you become
a quick and connected and loving
observer of yourself.
You see, not in order to
judge-- oh, my belly's this,
or my back is that, or I'm
stiff here-- but it's going,
oh, that's what I'm doing.
What'll happen if I do that?
And bang, bang, bang,
people just pop up.
LISA: These are things
you can do at your desk,
you can do anywhere.
ANAT: Yes.
Park the car and
do this in your car.
ANAT: Yeah, you can even
do it while you drive
a little bit, as long
as you stay awake
to what happens around you.
Well, you get more
alert, actually.
This is great.
Actually, really, there's
a whole question of the base
level of alertness of the brain,
and when people get ill or they
get older, they
start-- literally--
it's not really that there are
lights in the brain, but they
start really dimming down--
LISA: I want to do all my
interviews like this now,
this would be great.
ANAT: Yes.
Fully connected and
alert, this is great.
I can see it in your eyes.
Your eyes are much more--
it's a level of awakefulness,
it's a base awakefulness from
which you operate your life.
LISA: Yes.
And it's a wonderful
life, that's
what the [INAUDIBLE] like.
Now, does my mobility
and my neck get--
Oh, now sit just in the middle
and turn your head to the left
and use everything you learned.
You see, use what you learned
and feel what it's like.
Wow, I can see--
And feel the smoothness
of the movement.
And now don't force it,
but move to the right.
It'll be a little better
but nothing like it.
You feel?
Now that's great, because
beforehand I could only
see here, and now I can
see all the way behind me
and all the way behind
the other direction.
ANAT: Yes.
That's incredible.
That's absolutely awesome.
I hope you tried that at
home, and you can always
watch the replay, too, because
that's so freeing and-- did
oxygen get to my brain?
Yeah.
LISA: Feels like it.
-Yes.
What happens is, first of
all, you breathe better.
Immediately, you
freed the diaphragm.
But all the systems are
interconnected so they just
work better, the absorption.
My daughter was in the hospital
with pretty severe pneumonia
and she really had a
hard time breathing,
she was on an oxygen supply
machine kind of thing.
And I would do two,
three minutes with her
because I didn't
want to tire her,
because she needed all
her energy for healing.
And she knows my work, so
she just would sit and lean
and I just worked directly
on her back a little bit,
and because she was tied, her
oxygen absorption would go
from pretty low, pretty scary--
-Oh, interesting.
--to close to 100.
Then because of the
illness, it would go back,
and then I'd work on her again--
That's an amazing way of
being able to measure it.
Oh no, I've worked with
people after a stroke and stuff
and you can see-- and
these are involuntary parts
of the system, but they're
interconnected to movement
and organization of the brain.
We'll take a look at
one of Anat's classes
and one of the students
in her classes.
Take a look at this.
I came into this thinking that
maybe it would help me manage
the pain for the rest of my
life, and I'm leaving here--
it's like a miracle to me, like
I know it's possible for me
to rejuvenate and revitalize
myself and my whole life.
Did you know that the
secret to your vital self
lies in how your brain works?
What your brain tends to do
if you just live your life
normally is to get more
and more into a rut
where you run on autopilot.
What I've discovered working
with thousands of adults
and children is that the moment
we wake up our brain to resume
creating new connections,
we are flooded
with energy and well-being.
We move more freely
and we have less pain.
So I'm here and I am feeling
so much life and vitality
in my body that I am
just-- and I have no idea.
The door is so wide
open about what
this work will do through me.
I feel like I'm a little
kid in a candy store.
Thank you.
You might have noticed that as
habits get more and more deeply
ingrained over the years, we
lose flexibility and strength
in our body and in our minds.
We lose our power, creativity,
we never jump anymore,
and we lose vitality.
The Anat Baniel Method will give
you access to your own brain
and help you wake it up to form
new patterns and possibilities
for you, helping you
fulfill on your dreams
while enjoying your daily life.
Been in bed for
3 and 1/2 years,
and I started windsurfing
again this year religiously.
And I incorporate my moves
into the windsurfing,
and it's easier and I go
faster every time I do less.
So I beat the boys on the water.
With the Anat Baniel Method,
you will immediately start
reversing the aging process.
Movement becomes more
fluid, you will experience
greater stamina, and
your thinking will
become more clear and creative.
In other words, you will
start feeling youthful
and you will be
more youthful again.
When were you diagnosed
with Parkinson's?
Two years ago.
OK, and look at her.
By the time you're
diagnosed, you've
had it for a while, right?
Absolutely.
Yes, and look.
So Kay, run back to your place,
and the camera follow Kay.
[CHEERING]
I invite you to
experience our vitality
and anti-aging movement
programs through the DVDs,
our workshops, private sessions
with our practitioners,
or professional
training programs.
And make sure you
check our innovative
online interactive movement
program called Desk Trainer.
Get ready for a vibrant,
pain-free, and energy-filled
life
That is an amazing
example of how
your work helps all sorts of
people from all walks of life.
What about people who've
had multiple surgeries
or are heading into more
surgeries after one had failed?
Can you help people who
have been through surgeries?
Absolutely, because when you
have a surgery-- injury that
led to surgery or a surgery by
itself-- from the point of view
of the body and the brain,
even though it's necessary
and we're well-meaning, it's
a form of an injury, right?
LISA: Yeah, true.
You open, you break,
you cut, you sew.
I mean, this is big deal.
Yeah.
And we need to relearn
how to move ourselves.
And very often, people who
have back pain or other kinds
of pain, the pain
developed over the years
due to the way that
they were moving
and the kind of pressures
that we're consistently--
LISA: They got locked in.
And certain pressures
in certain joints
that created the trouble.
So you want to learn to
move-- even if the surgery's
successful, you want
to move differently
or you're going
to drive yourself
to where you were before.
So you can get to
a quicker healing
through movement, even though
the surgeon or somewhere
in your procedure they would
say, don't do this exercise,
don't do exercise.
I think that more
and more, people
understand that after surgery--
as soon as possible to get
people moving.
It used to be that people had
to lie down for a week or two
and that was a disaster, because
then the brain really loses
connection and patterns
and it's not a good thing,
and people get very weak.
So everybody tries to
get people on their feet
as fast as possible today.
LISA: OK.
I believe so, that
it's a general thing,
so that's excellent.
The question is what do you
do, what kind of movement
do you do?
LISA: Right.
And I would start
with movement, actually
with the people lying
down so that there
is no demand of the
pull of gravity,
and people are not
scared, because people
learn their experience.
So if you put somebody
on their feet too soon--
either they had a stroke
or a surgery or something
like that-- they
will do something,
but that something is
usually very disorganized,
and that is what's learned.
So I call it learning
your own limitations.
So instead of doing that, I
start getting people to move
and getting the brain to
reconnect to different parts
of the body, and do all kinds of
dynamic relationships before I
make the full demand
of carrying your weight
or doing it stronger
and all that stuff.
And yes, hundreds, thousands--
not hundreds of thousands,
but thousands of people--
that have gone from inability
to really freedom of movement,
or what I call moving
people from the no to the yes.
LISA: Yeah, beautiful,
the no to the yes.
All right, well take a
look at this next video,
and you can do this
exercise with us as well.
Anat's going to take you
through a standing exercise.
Take a look.
Please get up, stand up,
turn 30 degrees to your left.
Spread your feet comfortably and
bend your knees a little bit.
And now-- carefully
on your head,
not to hit it-- bend down with
your hands towards your toes
as if you want to touch your
toes, but do not stretch.
And just see how far you
go without trying hard
and come back.
And now turn to face the back
of the chair in front of you.
Lean on your hands on
the back of the chair,
and now round your
back, round your spine,
pull your belly in,
and lower your head
and eyes to look towards
your belly button.
And then arch your back,
push the belly out,
and look up with your
head towards the ceiling.
And now round your back,
pull your belly in, and look
towards your belly button.
And then arch your
back, free your abdomen,
and look up with your eyes.
And now stand up, turn 30
degrees towards your left,
bend your knees a
little bit, and go down
with your hand towards the
floor and see if it's become
a little easier to go down.
And come back up, turn
towards the chair,
lean on the back of the chair in
front if you, spread your legs,
bend the knees a little bit.
And now pull the belly in and
look under your left armpit.
Turn your head to peak
under your left armpit
and then arch your back and
look over your left shoulder.
Show your tail, free the belly,
and now pull your belly in
and look under your
right armpit and then
look over your right
shoulder, at your right tush.
And now again, look under your
left armpit, round your back,
pull your belly in, and then
look over your left shoulder.
And now stand up, stand up,
turn 30 degrees to your left,
bend your knees, spread
your feet, and go down
and see if it's become
even easier to go down
and if you're
going even further.
Excellent.
And stand up and sit down.
OK, so now when people have
done that exercise in the past,
you said that in the beginning,
their pelvis barely moved.
I mean, check this out with you.
Did your pelvis move in
this particular exercise
we just saw?
Why do people have
so much stiffness
in that lower back pelvis area?
Well, it's probably for
a variety of reasons,
but I think primarily
when they're
young, when they're kids sitting
for many, many hours in school.
And anxiety gets us to pull our
belly in and hold our breath
and immobilize the
chest, which immobilizes
the lower back and the pelvis.
And then when we get
a little bit older,
the ideal of a flat stomach
and pulling the belly in
and believing that that
provides the power for the body
and the movement,
which is actually,
I believe, a myth and a mistake.
And then the brain
just has not-- or lost,
if they had it as babies
and young children--
just has lost the ability to
control that part because it's
not mapped in the brain.
Well, we're told
to have a tight core
and that the core supports the
lower back or the backbone.
Is that true?
No.
That's the short answer.
Well first of all, to say that
something supports something
is a mechanical model
of a stationary item.
OK.
OK, so if we were like a
big statue in a garden--
That would makes sense.
It would make sense,
because you want
to put something in front
of it, so if there's
wind it doesn't topple over.
But the way we keep our
balance is through movement,
we don't keep our balance
by immobilizing ourselves.
So it's a wrong idea, how
to try to get stronger.
Now it is absolutely true
that the most powerful muscles
in the body are connected to the
pelvis, but the most powerful
of those are the glutes.
And the lower back muscles
and the abdomen muscles
can be very powerful,
but their short-term work
muscles, they're not long-term.
And their direction is to
fold the body, to jump,
we have to use the back muscles.
And to do that, the front
muscles have to let go,
because that's how the
brain works, it alternates.
It's called antagonistic, I
don't like it because I don't
think they're in a war,
but it has to synchronize
as if controlled by the brain.
So in acute mental
illnesses like catatonia,
the brain contracts the
flexors and the extensors
at the same time, and
you know what it does?
It makes people to be catatonic,
that means they can't move.
But if you want to
move-- that's what
I did with you earlier
and that's what happened
in the standing lesson.
That's why people get to
go down so much faster.
And their hamstrings are
not short anymore-- or less
short-- in seconds because
by arching the back
and freeing the belly,
pushing the belly out,
the brain gets the point.
And it says, oh, I can
do that, so to speak.
And then you just go
down, it's within seconds.
It's very dramatic, the change.
ANAT: Yes, it's
instantaneous, practically.
I love how you show
really how everybody
can do these exercises.
Let's take a look at another
video of one of Anat's classes.
Let's take a look.
I've been in a lot of pain
for the last two weeks,
and they said that my hip
may be-- it was the thing I
didn't want to hear--
that they think
I'm losing cartilage in my hip.
And every step would hurt,
and after the first day
I didn't have pain anymore.
So that's really,
really delightful.
Pain can be caused by
injuries, surgeries,
and other medical
conditions, but
most often, pain
comes from the way
we've been using our bodies.
The way that our brain has
figured out how to move us,
like the way we stand, how
we walk, and the movements we
do every day.
My name is Joel,
I'm 71 years old,
and over the past several
years I've developed
a number of walking issues.
And I must say, in four
relatively short lessons,
I feel like an
absolutely new person.
I have fluidity in my knees,
I have fluidity in my hips,
my walking is a lot better.
I came with chronic foot pain,
I don't have foot pain anymore.
And all I can say is
that it's quite amazing.
Habitual, rigid, limited, and
compulsive patterns of movement
often are the cause of
the pain we experience.
Through the nine essentials
of the Anat Baniel Method--
and through very safe, gentle,
and fun moments lessons--
you will wake up your
brain and you will flood it
with new information that
gets it out of its rut
to discover new alternatives and
pain-free ways for you to move.
I had pretty severe
back pain coming in,
I was unable to walk upright.
Wasn't able to sit on the
floor listening to the lectures
for quite a while.
And through this work, I've
been able to figure out
how to move in my body
to alleviate that pain.
I still play golf and
I still mountain bike.
A healthy body is a body
that moves in a fluid way,
with the brain
re-calibrating information
on an ongoing basis.
Because the body is
an integrated system,
it is difficult to fix, for
example, lower back pain
by simply focusing
on the lower back.
With the Anat Baniel
Method, you will
get to move not only your
whole body, but also your mind
in many different and new ways.
Your pain will diminish and
oftentimes simply disappear.
In the process, you will become
more flexible and stronger,
your breathing and
posture will improve,
and you will experience an
increasing level of creativity,
clarity, and self-awareness.
It's amazing.
I mean, there's no pain, I
can move it back, forward,
up, down.
I have two tears
in my rotator cuff.
I've been to two
different doctors, two
different physical therapists,
and I'm going on next Tuesday,
and she's going to be shocked
because she's going to say,
oh my gosh, what happened?
Because she just won't
be able to believe it,
because they measure
you and stuff, so--
Whether you do our
pain-free movement programs
through the DVDs,
through our workshops,
through private sessions,
or through our professional
training programs, or also
through our online interactive
movement program
called Desk Trainer,
the changes you
will see and feel
are going to be staggering.
Get ready for a whole new you.
OK, so now how can fitness--
and this type of movement,
I should say-- help with
slowing down the aging process
or adding longevity to life?
How does that work?
What's the connection there?
Well, the connection is that
this way of doing the movement
with essentials-- which are
the principles through which
the brain wakes up,
which is what children
do-- so first of all, it's
movement with attention.
We did that.
You pay attention to what
you feeling as you move.
That becomes your focus.
Then you slow down,
because fast you can only
do what you already know,
that's how the brain works
and the patterns work.
So if you want to
create something new,
you have got to slow down,
and it's very, very powerful.
And then reducing
the force because it
increases the sensitivity.
You can feel more
what's happening,
and the feeling of what happens
is what wakes up the brain
and gets it to create
new connections.
And then variations,
you get playful,
you make intentional
mistakes, you
get very loose about the goals.
You don't drive for a goal.
You know you're
going to get there,
but you're doing it that way.
Enthusiasm, you amplify
positive changes.
You use imagination,
you use awareness,
all those are some
of the essentials.
The brain literally
creates new connections,
and the estimate is 1.8
million new connections
per second when you apply
the movement with intention.
And that process of
differentiation in the brain
and then integration
into new possibilities--
literal new possibilities--
is the process of life,
and that's what children do.
And they're the most vibrant,
then they move all the time.
What happens with this work
is you can always start
with it wherever the person is.
So if somebody's even in
bed, not able to get up,
they can still move their
tongue or their fingers.
So there's somewhere that
you can access the brain
and wake it up.
The brain wakes up
because of the way
you do the process, not because
of the content of the process.
-What about eyes?
-Huge.
It's huge.
That's why I use it, because
a third of the cortex
is visual cortex.
It's very connected to
many, many different systems
in the brain.
And we usually move the
eyes together with the head,
and actually with the
shoulders and everything.
People get older and
then everything gets
more and more glued together.
LISA: Yeah.
When you move the eyes in
opposite directions to the head
or in opposite
direction, you create
a massive differentiation
in the brain.
You have no choice but to do.
And then when you come back
to do the original movement,
the brain is already
organizing it better because it
has all this new information.
The brain is an
information system.
It has all this new
information to work with.
Can you actually
improve your eyesight
or help with that degeneration,
after 40 eyesight thing?
Well, depends what the
generation is due to.
It can be different metabolic
stuff and so-and-so.
I can't make a general
statement like that,
but I can certainly tell
you that my eyesight
got a whole lot better
from doing this work.
Not only that, when I
don't do it for a while--
and I get tired and travel
or dehydrated-- my eyesight
is not as good.
The eyesight, we tend to
think of it like we are 20/20
or blah blah blah, whatever
numbers, but it's also dynamic.
Everything about us is dynamic.
And what movement with attention
and all the other essentials
do is it gets us
into motion literally
in the physical sense,
cognitive, emotional,
spiritual.
Now are there specific
eye exercises that you do?
Well, many different ones.
You see, you can do
it in up and down,
you can do it in conjunction
with leg movements.
You can do it when
you lie on your belly,
you can do it when
you lie on your side.
You want to bring
richness of possibilities
and then when you stand up
and just do your daily life,
you find that you do it
differently and better.
LISA: Which is really great.
You have a whole program
that's called Deskercises.
Yes.
And you do all of
these exercises,
you can do right from your desk.
ANAT: 40 different five-to-seven
minute movement lessons.
And I could have
done 500, which is
why we stopped at 40 for now.
And I call them brain pops.
Like lollipops for the brain.
That's great.
-Yeah.
Yeah.
Now you work a lot
with autistic children,
and you have made
significant changes
in their movement, behavior.
How does that work?
With the kids on
the autism spectrum?
LISA: Yes.
I believe, from my
observation, that nobody
knows what causes it really.
I mean, people have
different ideas.
So we don't know
the cause exactly,
but we know what we see,
that it's very, very tough.
And my observation
leads me to think
that the base of
this problem, it's
really a neuromotor disorder.
Neuromotor disorder.
So that's a movement disorder,
it's a brain movement disorder.
And underneath it, it's actually
the brain has a difficult time
perceiving differences.
So it can't differentiate and
it doesn't know what to do,
so it gets flooded
with stimulation
and it can't makes
sense of its world.
It can't organize the body well.
So if you look-- and
of course, cognition,
interpersonal relationships,
all that stuff.
So people are very
impacted by the fact
their kid's on the spectrum.
Here you see a beautiful
child and they don't talk
or they can't relate and
it's just heartbreaking.
Because you go like, why?
LISA: Yeah.
What I've found, and my
colleagues have found,
these kids-- like when I say
move and feel what you do?
They're confused,
they don't know even
what they feel as they move.
So we start working
with the movement
and we get them
to start relating
to the gravitational
field better,
and know their up from the down.
It's very, very basic, but we
take them where they have holes
and they spontaneously start
talking, they start relating.
To my great surprise, many
of them start eating better.
A lot of them have
real eating disorders,
they can't tolerate many foods.
I don't work on food, but
somehow that connects.
The gut-brain connection,
whatever it does,
that even gets better organized.
And I used to think that I
could only help kids that are up
to maybe six, seven years old.
And now-- because parents, since
the book "Kids Beyond Limits"
came out-- more and more
parents with kids that are older
on the autism spectrum are
bringing them, and some of them
we are seeing really
magnificent results.
So I was really wrong,
because I thought
that the brain is too formed
by the time they're 13 or 10.
Well, I was wrong.
LISA: My god, that's amazing.
Now we can't help all of
them as much, but many of them
we help a lot.
That's amazing, even at
that-- no matter what age.
All right, well let's take
a look one more time at Anat
in action and some
of the responsiveness
that people get from her work.
Take a look.
So a big part of this work is
to actually become us, learn
us, have the freedom to
use ourselves in the way we
were built to be used.
That's one side of it.
The other side is to have
the brain and our feeling
capacities and our capacity
to listen to ourselves
and invent ourselves, you see?
Because all those
things are discovered,
there's no manual that
the [INAUDIBLE] says,
rotate your leg, that'll
help your pelvis move which
will help you roll over
more easy to your belly.
Oh, OK, let me go try it.
It's all done by feeling.
And the capacity to
feel, and the capacity
to be guided by what you feel,
is one of the biggest gifts
you'll get in this training.
It'll also make you more
intelligent, trust me.
So you have many
different products
that you have recorded
and done classes,
and you've recorded
most of them on video.
So here's a picture of all
of the different things,
your book that you wrote--
ANAT: Well, I have two books.
I have "Kids Beyond
Limits," it's
about the work with the
children with special needs,
but it's great for all
parents with all kids
because all kids
have special needs.
They need to grow and learn.
And the second book
is "Move Into Life,"
and that's for adults.
We have training programs
for practitioners,
I do live seminars--
LISA: So you teach.
I teach a lot.
And then you have practitioners
all over the country, right?
Yes, absolutely.
And all over the world?
Not a lot, but it's
starting to be more and more
because we train practitioners.
Well you need to train as many
as you can because this work is
phenomenal, and for you
to be able to train people
and for them to work under
you, it's an incredible honor
and it's an honor
to have you here.
What you've done
and the difference
that you have made
in people's lives
is so worth telling
people about.
So thank you very much for
being here, for showing us.
I hope you had a
great experience
doing some of the
exercises with us,
so thank you for being here.
Thank you so much, Lisa.
It really was a great
pleasure for me, too.
LISA: Thank you so much.
If you want to watch a replay
of my interview with Anat Baniel
or do some of the exercises,
you can just go to gaiamtv.com
and watch the show over again.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.